Munna Bhai M.B.B.S. (translation: Munna Bro M.B.B.S.) is a 2003 Indian Hindi-language comedy drama film written and directed by Rajkumar Hirani in his directorial debut and produced by Vidhu Vinod Chopra under the banner Vinod Chopra Films. It features Sunil Dutt in his final film role as the father to his real-life son, Sanjay Dutt, who stars as the titular character. Gracy Singh, Jimmy Sheirgill, Arshad Warsi, Rohini Hattangadi and Boman Irani play other roles.

The first installment of the Munna Bhai film series, the film follows Munna Bhai, a don in the Mumbai underworld, trying to please his father by pretending to be a doctor, but when a doctor, Asthana (Irani), exposes his lies and tarnishes his father's honor, Munna enrolls in a medical college. Chaos ensues when Munna, upon finding that Asthana is the dean of the college, vows revenge, while also sparking a romance with a house doctor, Suman (Singh), unaware that she is his childhood friend and Asthana's daughter. The film was followed by its sequel, Lage Raho Munna Bhai (2006).[3]

Released on 19 December 2003,[4] the film was a major critical and commercial success, and went on to win the 2004 National Film Award for Best Popular Film, and several Filmfare Awards, including the Best Film (Critics) and Best Screenplay. At the box office, it achieved a silver jubilee status (25-week run) being one of only eight Hindi films to have achieved this status since the year 2000.[5] In its 26th week of release, the film could still be found playing on 300 screens throughout India.[6] The film's release was also accompanied by a mobile video game based on the film by Indiagames.[7]

Plot
Murliprasad Sharma is a gangster in Mumbai, known by the title 'Munna Bhai' ("bhai" means brother or don in the local dialect), who runs an extortion racket. Every year, with the help of his aide Sarkeshwar "Circuit" Sharma and his gang, he converts his hide-out into a fully-functioning hospital to fool Munna's visiting parents Hariprasad "Hari" Sharma and Parvati Sharma, who believe Munna is a real doctor.

Meanwhile, one of Hari's annual visits with Parvati culminates in Hari bumping into childhood acquaintance Dr. Jagdish Asthana, who is the dean of a local medical college and had founded their village's first medical centre. Hari proposes to Asthana that they get his daughter and Munna's childhood friend "Chinki" married to him. Asthana agrees, even though Munna asks her to reject him, lest his parents discover the truth. However, when his maid reacts shockingly to Munna's photo, Asthana realizes the truth and exposes Munna to Hari and Parvati. Humiliated at their son's lack of a real vocation, they leave the city and return home. Munna vows to become a doctor to get back at Asthana but unknowingly ends up enrolling into his college with the help of home surgeon Dr. Rustom Pavri. Certain that Munna has cheated his way through the entrance exam, but lacking real evidence, he is forced to allow Munna to study there.

Upon becoming a student, Munna falls back into his ways by enforcing his regime of "common-sense treatment", directly challenging Asthana's conventional opinions to get under his skin. Despite the school's emphasis on mechanical, cartesian, impersonal, and often bureaucratic relationships between doctors and patients, Munna, who constantly seeks to impose a more empathetic and almost holistic regimen around himself, clashes with professors over their lack of empathy towards patients, especially those who are deemed incurable by conventional medicine. His behavior is well-received by the hospital staff and patients, who are able to see the good-natured intent behind his anti-establishment actions. Asthana, perceiving this as chaos, is unable to stop it and resorts to laughter therapy to deal with his stress.

Munna simultaneously develops a friendly relationship with Dr. Suman, who works at the hospital, unaware that she is "Chinki", an ignorance she hilariously exploits to a point where he gives up on marriage plans with "Chinki" to exact revenge on Asthana after Suman sends her doctor friend to masquerade, and uses old-fashioned kindness and love to 'cure' many patients at the hospital, including Karan, a suicidal youngster he met on his first day of college, and Dr. Pavri's father, who at one point fell ill and short of a desire to live. He even thanks an underappreciated janitor and arranges to bring a stripper inside the patient ward to cheer up Zaheer, a man dying from stomach cancer who he befriends in the process.

When Asthana learns about the stripper episode, he sees this as a potential reason to expel Munna on disciplinary grounds but fails to do so after Munna injures himself to stay back. However, after he recovers, the hospital staff, patients and students stand in Asthana's way and refuse to let Munna leave. Munna is then made to take a test before the entire college the next day to keep his enrolment. Later that night, Zaheer dies; still in shock, Munna gives up at a point during the test and leaves; in the process, Anand Banerjee, a paraplegic patient who has been brain-dead for the last 12 years, comes back to life. Suman realizes Munna as the miracle behind Anand's recovery and gives a heartfelt speech, defending his actions. Asthana, finally moved, is forced to change his opinion of Munna.

Munna does not become a doctor, but news of his 'miraculous' treatments reaches his parents. They return to the city and forgive him. Munna ends up marrying Suman after learning of her true identity as "Chinki", and together, they open a real hospital in Munna's family village. Circuit also gets married a year later and has a son nicknamed "Short Circuit". Asthana resigns as the dean and becomes the head doctor, employing Munna's methods, while Rustom succeeds him. As the film concludes, Anand, restored to normal mental health, narrates the story to a few children at the hospital as he is about to leave for Kolkata.
